Now, we are talking about worldly desires,
and worldly desires may entice us
to do wrong for selfish advantage.
An expression of this selfishness is
the worldly desire of instant gratification.
Our theme today is, therefore,
“Reject the Desire of Instant Gratification.”
We will answer two questions:
Why is instant gratification a problem?
And how does God’s undeserved kindness
help us to resist instant gratification?
To our first question,
Why is instant gratification a problem?
What is instant gratification?
Now, instant, or immediate, gratification
means exchanging a future benefit
in order to obtain a less rewarding
but more immediate benefit.
A prominent example is Esau.
He was willing to trade his birthright
with its future blessings for a quick meal.
While this example shows
that the desire of immediate gratification
has always existed,
today it’s more of a problem.
Why?
Because technology and social media
—with the world at our fingertips—
makes it harder to delay gratification.
Everything is possible and without waiting.
For instance, almost all advertisements
contain offers
for paying later or loan financing.
So why wait and save before buying?
Sadly, many ignore the warning
at Proverbs 22:7
and experience the consequences of being
“a slave to the lender.”
Or another example:
Think of the effect instant gratification
can have on relationships.
If we are upset with somebody,
it might make us feel good
to send an angry text message.
However, we know that first
taking the time to examine our feelings
—the feelings of the other—
and following them
with a face-to-face communication
is the better and more successful course,
although more time-consuming.
A third example: Today, you can easily find
a marriage partner by using the Internet.
And by doing this,
you are creating instant gratification.
Yet, statistics reveal the short lifespan
of those relationships.
Jehovah, on the other hand,
highlights the value of patience.
It takes time to get to know ourselves,
to get to know the prospective partner,
and to prepare a healthy relationship.
This makes a successful marriage
much more likely,
resulting in lasting benefits.
These were just a few examples
of the attitude that has shaped
our modern world.
Yes, we live in a society
that is governed by greed
with its bad consequences.
That brings us to our second question:
How does God’s undeserved kindness
help us to resist instant gratification?
Let us, please, open to our text for today,
this is Titus chapter 2, to find out why
we talk about God’s undeserved kindness.
Let us read here, Titus chapter 2,
beginning with verse 11.
There we read:
“For the undeserved kindness of God
has been manifested,
bringing salvation to all sorts of people.”
And now our day’s text comes:
“It [the undeserved kindness of God]
“trains us to reject ungodliness
and worldly desires.”
Did you notice what helps us
to reject worldly desire?
It is, according to verse 11,
God’s undeserved kindness.
Yet, what exactly is
God’s undeserved kindness,
and how does it help us to reject
the desire of instant gratification?
Now, the word translated here
as “undeserved kindness”
conveys the thought of a free gift,
of something that is unearned and unmerited.
This gift is expressed in various ways.
And here in verse 11,
Paul refers
to the greatest expression of this
godly undeserved kindness
—the ransom sacrifice of Jesus.
Jehovah forgives us our sins,
which opens the door
to many other wonderful blessings.
For example,
we can enjoy
a wonderful, close relationship with Jehovah.
This good relationship
will enable us to resist pressure.
How?
Let us illustrate this
by means of a situation in David’s life.
For quite some time,
David had to flee from Saul.
Now, if we turn to 1 Samuel chapter 24,
we see that David was hiding in a cave.
And it was this cave
that King Saul entered to rest.
Would David now give in to the temptation
and kill Saul and end the time
of being in the wilderness
and now finally reign as king?
Let us read here at 1 Samuel 24:4
and see how David’s men encouraged him
to find instant gratification.
Here in verse 4, we read:
“David’s men said to him:
“‘This is the day on which Jehovah
is saying to you,
“‘“Look! I am giving your enemy
into your hand,
and you can do to him
whatever seems good to you.”’”
So, what would David do?
We know that David resisted the temptation.
But why?
Let’s look at verse 6.
Here we read: “He [David] said to his men:
“‘It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint
“‘that I should do such a thing to my lord,
the anointed of Jehovah,
“‘by lifting my hand against him,
for he is the anointed of Jehovah.’”
David enjoyed
a close relationship with Jehovah.
He knew God’s thinking,
and he was able to apply godly principles.
The many prayers recorded in the Bible
show us that David
put all his trust in Jehovah.
This made him wait.
He chose delayed gratification.
Now, how are we equipped to resist
the worldly desire of instant gratification?
Remember,
if we approach our close Friend, Jehovah,
according to Philippians 4:6, 7, in prayer,
then His peace ‘will guard our heart.’
And then we further prepare our hearts
by our regular studies.
They help us to get acquainted
with Jehovah’s principles.
So, then, if we want something instantly
at a price that could endanger
our good priorities in our life,
then our close relationship with Jehovah
helps us
to choose the long-term benefit
over instant gratification.
A second way of how
the undeserved kindness of God
helps us to resist instant gratification is
looking into the future and seeing
the bigger picture.
This is what Jesus did.
At Hebrews 12:2,
the apostle Paul described Jesus’ future
as “the joy that was set before him.”
Jesus saw his future in heaven,
and he did not give in
to create immediate relief.
And take the example
when Satan offered to him “all the kingdoms.”
Jesus understood the bigger picture;
he understood his role in God’s purpose,
and this allowed him to resist the temptation
and to not go for the immediate benefit
but resist the offer.
So are we not doing the same?
We visualize ourselves
being in Jehovah’s new world
—welcoming loved ones, teaching them.
Keeping this conviction
—this hope—alive
helps us to resist the desire
of instant gratification
and to wait for the long-term benefit.
So in conclusion,
resisting the desire of instant gratification
helps us to make wise decisions
when it comes
to material pursuits or relationships.
Jehovah’s undeserved kindness in the form
of a close relationship helps us
to prepare our heart today.
And the gift of our wonderful hope
helps us to see ourselves in the future
with all the benefits that outweigh,
by far, instant gratification.